Artificial intelligence | Cyber.gov.au Skip to main content 

Report a cybercrime, cyber security incident or vulnerability. 

Report 

Show 

Search 

What are you looking for? 

You can search for keywords to find pages that can help you e.g. scam 

Smart Search 

Report 

Contact us 

Portal login 

Menu 

Mega menu 

About us Expand About us sub menu 

back to main menu 

About us 

Learn about who we are and what we do. 

About us 

About ASD's ACSC 

Who we are 

Alerts and advisories 

News 

Reports and statistics 

Contact us 

Learn the basics Expand Learn the basics sub menu 

back to main menu 

Learn the basics 

Interactive tools and advice to boost your online safety. 

Learn cyber security Sign up for alerts 

Explore the basics 

Recognise and report scams 

Set secure passphrases 

Set up and perform regular backups 

Turn on multi-factor authentication 

Update your devices 

Watch out for threats 

Small business 

Seniors 

View resources 

Glossary 

Quiz library 

Resources library 

Translated Information 

Protect yourself Expand Protect yourself sub menu 

back to main menu 

Protect yourself 

Advice and information about how to protect yourself online. 

Protect yourself Easy steps to secure yourself online Cyber health check tool Sign up for alerts 

Securing your accounts 

Multi-factor authentication 

Passphrases 

Passkeys 

Securing your devices 

How to secure your devices 

How to back up your files and devices 

How to update your device and software 

Securing your email 

Email security 

Staying secure online 

Connecting with others online 

Protect yourself from scams 

Online shopping 

Connecting to public Wi-Fi and hotspots 

Secure your Wi-Fi and router 

Cloud shared responsibility model: Guidance for individuals and small and medium businesses 

Cyber security for charities and not-for-profits 

Resources to protect yourself 

Protecting your family 

Personal cyber security guides 

Threats Expand Threats sub menu 

back to main menu 

Threats 

Common online security risks and advice on what you can do to protect yourself. 

Threats Report a cybercrime Sign up for alerts 

Types of threats 

Account compromise 

Business email compromise 

Cryptomining 

Data breaches 

Hacking 

Identity theft 

Information stealer 

<notitle> 

Malicious insiders 

Malware 

Phishing 

Quishing 

Ransomware 

Scams 

Social engineering 

Report and recover Expand Report and recover sub menu 

back to main menu 

Report and recover 

Respond to cyber threats and take steps to protect yourself from further harm. 

Report and recover Make a report Sign up for alerts 

Report 

Report a cybercrime, incident or vulnerability 

Cybercrime - getting help 

Single Reporting Portal 

How we help during a cyber security incident 

ASD’s role in cyber security: For legal practitioners 

Supporting Australian organisations through a cyber security incident 

Limited Use 

Recover from 

Account compromise 

Business email compromise 

Data breaches 

Hacking 

Identity theft 

Malware 

Ransomware 

Scams 

For business and government Expand For business and government sub menu 

back to main menu 

For business and government 

Resources for business and government agencies on cyber security. 

For business and government Become an ASD partner Critical infrastructure All publications Alerts and advisories Exercise in a Box 

ASD's cyber security frameworks 

Information security manual 

Blueprint for Secure Cloud 

Essential Eight 

Gateway security guidance package 

Mitigating cyber security incidents 

Modern defensible architecture 

Principles of operational technology cyber security 

Secure design 

Artificial intelligence 

Operational technology environments 

Quantum 

Secure by Design 

Protecting devices and systems 

Assessment and evaluation programs 

Cloud computing 

Hardening systems and applications 

Legacy IT management 

Remote working and secure mobility 

Securing edge devices 

System administration 

Detecting and responding to threats 

Cyber security incident response 

Detecting and mitigating Active Directory compromises 

Event logging 

Vulnerability planning 

Small business cyber security 

Small business hub 

Protecting your staff 

Securing customer personal data 

Supplier cyber risk management 

Managed service providers 

Managing cyber supply chains 

Protecting business leaders 

Cyber security for business leaders 

Security tips for social media and messaging apps 

Contact us 

Report a cybercrime or cyber security incident 

Portal login 

Australian Cyber 

Security Hotline 1300 CYBER1 (1300 292 371) 

Breadcrumb 

Home 

For business and government 

Artificial intelligence 

Artificial intelligence 

Content written for 

Small & medium business 

Large organisations & infrastructure 

Government 

Share on 

This page lists publications on the governance and use of artificial intelligence. 

An introduction to artificial intelligence 

Artificial intelligence (AI) is an emerging technology that will play an increasingly influential role in the everyday life of Australians. 

AI data security 

This publication provides essential data security guidance for organisations that develop and/or use AI systems, including businesses, government and critical infrastructure. It highlights the importance of data security in ensuring the accuracy and integrity of AI outcomes, and presents an in-depth examination of 3 areas of data security risks in AI systems: data supply chain, maliciously modified (poisoned) data, and data drift. 

Artificial intelligence and machine learning: Supply chain risks and mitigations 

This guidance is intended for organisations and staff that deploy or develop AI or ML systems and components. 

Content credentials: Strengthening multimedia integrity in the generative AI era 

This cybersecurity information sheet discusses how Content Credentials (especially Durable ones) can be valuable to protect the provenance of media, raises awareness of the state of this solution, provides recommended practices to ensure the preservation of provenance, and discusses the importance of widespread adoption across the information ecosystem. 

Convoluted layers: An artificial intelligence primer 

Rapid advances in artificial intelligence (AI), along with public releases of AI products, have prompted governments, businesses and criminals to accelerate efforts to incorporate this new technology into their operations. This advice provides definitions for some of the most commonly encountered AI terms in cybersecurity and a brief typology of cyber threats that will arise from AI. 

Deploying AI systems securely 

AI security is a rapidly evolving area of research. As agencies, industry, and academia discover potential weaknesses in AI technology and techniques to exploit them, organizations will need to update their AI systems to address the changing risks, in addition to applying traditional IT best practices to AI systems. 

Engaging with artificial intelligence 

The purpose of this paper is to provide organisations with guidance on how to use artificial intelligence (AI) systems securely. The paper summarises some important threats related to AI systems and includes cybersecurity mitigation strategies to aid organisations in engaging with AI while managing risk. It provides mitigations to assist both organisations that maintain their own AI systems and organisations that use third-party AI systems. 

Guidelines for secure AI system development 

This document recommends guidelines for providers of any systems that use artificial intelligence (AI), whether those systems have been created from scratch or built on top of tools and services provided by others. This document is aimed primarily at providers of AI systems who are using models hosted by an organisation, or are using external application programming interfaces (APIs). 

Was this helpful? 

Yes 

Yes this was helpful 

No 

No this was not helpful 

Feedback 

Thanks for your feedback! 

We welcome additional feedback below. 

Was this information easy to understand? 

Clear and well-written 

Unclear or confusing 

Missing important information 

Contained errors 

Will you take action after reading this? 

Yes 

No 

Did you find the information you were looking for? 

Navigation was clear and intuitive 

It was difficult to find 

Unable to find it 

Did the design and layout of this page meet your expectations? 

Yes 

No 

Any recommended improvements or other comments? 

Leave this field blank 

Report a cyber security incident for critical infrastructure 

Get alerts on new threats Alert Service 

Become an ASD Partner 

Report a cybercrime or cyber security incident 

Acknowledgement of Country 

We acknowledge the Traditional Owners and Custodians of Country throughout Australia and their continuing connections to land, sea and communities. 

We pay our respects to them, their cultures and their Elders; past, present and emerging. We also recognise Australia's First Peoples' enduring contribution to Australia's national security. 

Australian Cyber Security Hotline 1300 CYBER1 (1300 292 371) 

Site links 
Contact us 

Glossary 

View all content 

Copyright 

Privacy 

Accessibility 

Disclaimer 

Careers 

Social media terms of use 

Popular pages 

Essential Eight 

Alerts and advisories 

Information Security Manual 

Authorised by the Australian Government, Canberra 

Back to top
