Information security manual
Guidelines for procurement and outsourcing

Last updated:           December 2025


Cyber supply chain risk management
Cyber supply chain risk management activities
Cyber supply chain risk management activities should be conducted during the earliest possible stage of
procurement of operating systems, applications, information technology (IT) equipment, operational
technology (OT) equipment and services. In particular, an organisation should consider the security risks
that may arise as systems, and their components, are being designed, built, stored, delivered, installed,
operated, maintained and decommissioned. This includes identifying and managing jurisdictional,
governance, privacy and security risks associated with the use of suppliers, such as software developers, IT
equipment manufacturers, OT equipment manufacturers, service providers and other organisations
involved in distribution channels. For example, outsourced cloud services may be located offshore and
subject to lawful and covert data collection without their customers’ knowledge. Additionally, use of
offshore services introduces jurisdictional risks as foreign countries’ laws could change with little warning.
Finally, foreign owned suppliers operating in Australia may be subject to a foreign government’s lawful
access to data belonging to their customers.

When procuring operating systems, applications, IT equipment, OT equipment and services, it is important
for an organisation to choose vendors that have demonstrated a commitment to the security of their
products. This will assist not only with reducing the potential number of vulnerabilities, but also increasing
the likelihood that timely patches, updates or vendor mitigations will be released to remediate any
vulnerabilities that are found. Furthermore, it is important for an organisation to choose suppliers that
have demonstrated a commitment to transparency and that have a strong track record of maintaining the
security of their own systems. In support of this, suppliers should openly provide evidence of their
implementation of such commitments, especially when requested by their customers. Finally, a shared
responsibly model which clearly defines the responsibilities of suppliers and their customers can be highly
beneficial and should be created and shared between both parties.

Control: ISM-1631; Revision: 4; Updated: Jun-25; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
Suppliers of operating systems, applications, IT equipment, OT equipment and services associated with
systems are identified.

Control: ISM-1452; Revision: 6; Updated: Jun-25; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
A supply chain risk assessment is performed for suppliers of operating systems, applications, IT equipment,
OT equipment and services in order to assess the impact to a system’s security risk profile.



                                                                                                              1
Control: ISM-1567; Revision: 2; Updated: Sep-22; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
Suppliers identified as high risk by a cyber supply chain risk assessment are not used.

Control: ISM-1568; Revision: 7; Updated: Jun-25; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
Operating systems, applications, IT equipment, OT equipment and services are procured from suppliers that
have demonstrated a commitment to the security of their products and services.

Control: ISM-1882; Revision: 3; Updated: Jun-25; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
Operating systems, applications, IT equipment, OT equipment and services are procured from suppliers that
have demonstrated a commitment to transparency for their products and services.

Control: ISM-1632; Revision: 6; Updated: Jun-25; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
Operating systems, applications, IT equipment, OT equipment and services are procured from suppliers that
have a strong track record of maintaining the security of their own systems.

Control: ISM-1569; Revision: 2; Updated: Sep-22; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
A shared responsibility model is created, documented and shared between suppliers and their customers in
order to articulate the security responsibilities of each party.

Supplier relationship management
Developing, implementing and maintaining a supplier relationship management policy can assist an
organisation in identifying, prioritising and maintaining strong relationships with suppliers that have
demonstrated a commitment to the security of their products and services. In doing so, these suppliers
should be documented on an approved supplier list.

Control: ISM-1785; Revision: 1; Updated: Dec-22; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
A supplier relationship management policy is developed, implemented and maintained.

Control: ISM-1786; Revision: 1; Updated: Dec-22; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
An approved supplier list is developed, implemented and maintained.

Sourcing operating systems, applications, IT equipment, OT equipment
and services
In sourcing operating systems, applications, IT equipment, OT equipment and services, an organisation
should use trustworthy suppliers as part of cyber supply chain risk management assessments and
subsequently documented on their approved supplier list.

Furthermore, in order to support system availability, an organisation should aim to identify multiple
potential suppliers for critical operating systems, applications, IT equipment, OT equipment and services.
This coupled with keeping sufficient spares of critical IT equipment and OT equipment in reserve, can assist
in mitigating the impact of cyber supply chain disruptions.

Control: ISM-1787; Revision: 3; Updated: Jun-25; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
Operating systems, applications, IT equipment, OT equipment and services are sourced from approved
suppliers.

Control: ISM-1788; Revision: 3; Updated: Jun-25; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
Multiple potential suppliers are identified for sourcing critical operating systems, applications, IT equipment,
OT equipment and services.




ISM | Guidelines for procurement and outsourcing                                                              2
Control: ISM-1789; Revision: 2; Updated: Jun-24; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
Sufficient spares of critical IT equipment and OT equipment are sourced and kept in reserve.

Delivery of operating systems, applications, IT equipment, OT
equipment and services
As part of the delivery of operating systems, applications, IT equipment, OT equipment and services,
measures should be implemented to protect their integrity, noting that such measures will differ depending
on whether delivery relates to digital or physical distribution channels. For example, operating systems and
applications may benefit from delivery via encrypted communication channels while IT equipment and OT
equipment may benefit from tracking and tamper-evident packaging. In doing so, such measures are only
beneficial if they are assessed as part of acceptance of products and services. In all cases, suppliers should
be consulted on how best to confirm the integrity of their products and services.

While ensuring the integrity of operating systems, applications, IT equipment, OT equipment and services is
important, so is ensuring their authenticity. For example, a counterfeit product or service securely
delivered is still a counterfeit product or service that may not operate as intended or pose a risk to the
security of a system. To assist in identifying counterfeit products and services, suppliers should be
consulted on how best to confirm the authenticity of their products and services.

Control: ISM-1790; Revision: 2; Updated: Jun-25; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
Operating systems, applications, IT equipment, OT equipment and services are delivered in a manner that
maintains their integrity.

Control: ISM-1791; Revision: 2; Updated: Jun-25; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
The integrity of operating systems, applications, IT equipment, OT equipment and services are assessed as
part of acceptance of products and services.

Control: ISM-1792; Revision: 2; Updated: Jun-25; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
The authenticity of operating systems, applications, IT equipment, OT equipment and services are assessed
as part of acceptance of products and services.

Further information
Further information on cyber supply chain risk management can be found in the following Australian
Signals Directorate (ASD) publications:

    Choosing secure and verifiable technologies: Executive guidance

    Choosing secure and verifiable technologies

    Cyber supply chain risk management

    Identifying cyber supply chain risks.

Further information on cyber supply chain risk management can also be found in the following publications:

    Canada’s Canadian Centre for Cyber Security’s Cyber supply chain: An approach to assessing risk

    New Zealand’s National Cyber Security Centre’s Supply Chain Cyber Security: In Safe Hands

    United Kingdom’s National Cyber Security Centre’s Supply chain security guidance




ISM | Guidelines for procurement and outsourcing                                                            3
    United States’ Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency’s Secure by Demand: Priority
     Considerations for Operational Technology Owners and Operators when Selecting Digital Products.

Further information on cyber supply chain risk management can also be found on the United States’
Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency’s ICT Supply Chain Resource Library website.

Further information on cyber supply chain integrity can be found in National Institute of Standards and
Technology Special Publication 800-161 Rev. 1, Cybersecurity Supply Chain Risk Management Practices for
Systems and Organizations.

Further information on outsourced products and services can be found in the Department of Home Affairs’
Protective Security Policy Framework.

Further information on the procurement and use of evaluated operating systems, applications and IT
equipment can be found in the ‘Evaluated product procurement’ and ‘Evaluated product use’ sections of
the Guidelines for evaluated products.

Further information on suppliers that have made a pledge to implement Secure by Design and Secure by
Default principles and practices can be found on the United States’ Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security
Agency’s Secure by Design Pledge website.


Managed services and cloud services
Managed services
Managed service providers manage the services of an organisation on their behalf. This may include
application services, authentication services, backup services, desktop services, enterprise mobility
services, gateway services, hosting services, network services, procurement services, security services,
support services, and many other business-related services. In doing so, managed service providers may
manage services from their customers’ premises or their own premises. In considering security risks
associated with managed services, an organisation should consider all managed service providers that have
access to their facilities, systems or data.

Control: ISM-1736; Revision: 1; Updated: Dec-22; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
A managed service register is developed, implemented, maintained and verified on a regular basis.

Control: ISM-1737; Revision: 1; Updated: Sep-22; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
A managed service register contains the following for each managed service:

    managed service provider’s name

    managed service’s name

    purpose for using the managed service

    sensitivity or classification of data involved

    due date for the next security assessment of the managed service

    contractual arrangements for the managed service

    point of contact for users of the managed service

    24/7 contact details for the managed service provider.


ISM | Guidelines for procurement and outsourcing                                                              4
Assessment of managed service providers
Managed service providers will need to undergo regular security assessments against the requirements of
the Information security manual (ISM) to determine their security posture and security risks associated with
their use. Following an initial security assessment, subsequent security assessments should focus on any
new services that are being offered as well as any ISM or security-related system changes that have
occurred since the previous security assessment.

Control: ISM-1793; Revision: 1; Updated: Dec-24; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S; Essential 8: N/A
Managed service providers and their non-classified, OFFICIAL: Sensitive, PROTECTED and SECRET managed
services undergo an Infosec Registered Assessor Program (IRAP) assessment, using the latest release of the
ISM available prior to the beginning of the IRAP assessment (or a subsequent release), at least every 24
months.

Control: ISM-1971; Revision: 0; Updated: Dec-24; Applicable: TS; Essential 8: N/A
Managed service providers and their TOP SECRET managed services, including sensitive compartmented
information managed services, undergo a security assessment by ASD assessors (or their delegates), using
the latest release of the ISM available prior to the beginning of the security assessment (or a subsequent
release), at least every 24 months.

Outsourced cloud services
Outsourcing can be a cost-effective option for providing cloud services, as well as potentially delivering a
superior service. However, outsourcing can affect an organisation’s security risk profile. Ultimately, an
organisation will still need to decide whether a particular outsourced cloud service represents an
acceptable security risk and, if appropriate to do so, authorise it for their own use.

Control: ISM-1637; Revision: 2; Updated: Dec-22; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
An outsourced cloud service register is developed, implemented, maintained and verified on a regular basis.

Control: ISM-1638; Revision: 3; Updated: Sep-22; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
An outsourced cloud service register contains the following for each outsourced cloud service:

    cloud service provider’s name

    cloud service’s name

    purpose for using the cloud service

    sensitivity or classification of data involved

    due date for the next security assessment of the cloud service

    contractual arrangements for the cloud service

    point of contact for users of the cloud service

    24/7 contact details for the cloud service provider.

Control: ISM-1529; Revision: 2; Updated: Dec-21; Applicable: S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
Only community or private clouds are used for outsourced SECRET and TOP SECRET cloud services.




ISM | Guidelines for procurement and outsourcing                                                               5
Assessment of outsourced cloud service providers
Outsourced cloud service providers and their cloud services will need to undergo regular security
assessments against the requirements of the ISM to determine their security posture and security risks
associated with their use. Following an initial security assessment, subsequent security assessments should
focus on any new cloud services that are being offered as well as any ISM or security-related system
changes that have occurred since the previous security assessment.

Control: ISM-1570; Revision: 2; Updated: Dec-24; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S; Essential 8: N/A
Outsourced cloud service providers and their non-classified, OFFICIAL: Sensitive, PROTECTED and SECRET
cloud services undergo an IRAP assessment, using the latest release of the ISM available prior to the
beginning of the IRAP assessment (or a subsequent release), at least every 24 months.

Control: ISM-1972; Revision: 0; Updated: Dec-24; Applicable: TS; Essential 8: N/A
Outsourced cloud service providers and their TOP SECRET cloud services, including sensitive compartmented
information cloud services, undergo a security assessment by ASD assessors (or their delegates), using the
latest release of the ISM available prior to the beginning of the security assessment (or a subsequent
release), at least every 24 months.

Contractual security requirements with service providers
Obligations for protecting data are no different when using a managed service or cloud service than when
using an in-house service. As such, contractual arrangements with service providers should address how
data entrusted to them, including to any of their subcontractors, will be protected during contractual
arrangements and following the completion or termination of such contractual arrangements. However, in
some cases an organisation may require managed services or cloud services to be used before all security
requirements have been implemented by a service provider. In such cases, contractual arrangements with
service providers should include appropriate timeframes for the implementation of security requirements
and break clauses if these are not achieved.

In addition, although data ownership resides with service providers’ customers, this can become less clear
in some circumstances, such as when legal action is taken and a service provider is asked to provide access
to, or data from, their assets. To mitigate the likelihood of data being unavailable or compromised, an
organisation can document the types of data and its ownership in contractual arrangements with service
providers.

Furthermore, an organisation may make the decision to move from their current service provider for
strategic, operational or governance reasons. This may involve changing to another service provider,
moving to a different service with the same service provider or moving back to an on-premises solution. In
many cases, transferring data and functionality between old and new services or systems will be desired.
Service providers can assist their customers by ensuring data is as portable as possible and that as much
data can be exported as possible. As such, data should be stored in a documented format, preferably an
open standard, noting that undocumented or proprietary formats may make it more difficult for an
organisation to perform backup, service migration or service decommissioning activities.

Finally, to ensure that an organisation is given sufficient time to download their data or move to another
service provider should a service provider cease offering a particular service, a one-month notification
period should be documented in contractual arrangements with service providers.




ISM | Guidelines for procurement and outsourcing                                                              6
Control: ISM-1395; Revision: 7; Updated: Dec-22; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
Service providers, including any subcontractors, provide an appropriate level of protection for any data
entrusted to them or their services.

Control: ISM-0072; Revision: 9; Updated: Dec-22; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
Security requirements associated with the confidentiality, integrity and availability of data are documented
in contractual arrangements with service providers and reviewed on a regular and ongoing basis to ensure
they remain fit for purpose.

Control: ISM-1571; Revision: 3; Updated: Dec-22; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
The right to verify compliance with security requirements is documented in contractual arrangements with
service providers.

Control: ISM-1738; Revision: 1; Updated: Dec-22; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
The right to verify compliance with security requirements documented in contractual arrangements with
service providers is exercised on a regular and ongoing basis.

Control: ISM-1804; Revision: 0; Updated: Dec-22; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
Break clauses associated with failure to meet security requirements are documented in contractual
arrangements with service providers.

Control: ISM-0141; Revision: 7; Updated: Dec-22; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
The requirement for service providers to report cyber security incidents to a designated point of contact as
soon as possible after they occur or are discovered is documented in contractual arrangements with service
providers.

Control: ISM-1794; Revision: 1; Updated: Dec-22; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
A minimum notification period of one month by service providers for significant changes to their own service
provider arrangements is documented in contractual arrangements with service providers.

Control: ISM-1451; Revision: 4; Updated: Dec-22; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
Types of data and its ownership is documented in contractual arrangements with service providers.

Control: ISM-1572; Revision: 3; Updated: Jun-23; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
The regions or availability zones where data will be processed, stored and communicated, as well as a
minimum notification period for any configuration changes, is documented in contractual arrangements
with service providers.

Control: ISM-1573; Revision: 3; Updated: Dec-22; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
Access to all logs relating to an organisation’s data and services is documented in contractual arrangements
with service providers.

Control: ISM-1574; Revision: 3; Updated: Dec-22; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
The storage of data in a portable manner that allows for backups, service migration and service
decommissioning without any loss of data is documented in contractual arrangements with service
providers.

Control: ISM-1575; Revision: 1; Updated: Dec-22; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
A minimum notification period of one month for the cessation of any services by a service provider is
documented in contractual arrangements with service providers.




ISM | Guidelines for procurement and outsourcing                                                               7
Access to systems by service providers
To perform their contracted duties, service providers may need to access their customers’ systems.
However, without proper controls in place, this could leave systems vulnerable – especially when access
occurs from outside of Australian borders. As such, an organisation should ensure that their systems are
not accessed or administered by service providers unless such requirements, and associated measures to
control such requirements, are documented in contractual arrangements with service providers. In doing
so, it is important that sufficient measures are also in place to detect and record any unauthorised access,
such as customer support representatives or platform engineers accessing encryption keys. In such cases,
the service provider should immediately report the cyber security incident to their customer and make
available all logs pertaining to the unauthorised access.

Control: ISM-1073; Revision: 7; Updated: Jun-25; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
An organisation’s systems are not accessed or administered by a service provider unless a contractual
arrangement exists between the organisation and the service provider to do so.

Control: ISM-1576; Revision: 4; Updated: Jun-25; Applicable: NC, OS, P, S, TS; Essential 8: N/A
If an organisation’s systems are accessed or administered by a service provider in an unauthorised manner,
the organisation is immediately notified.

Further information
Further information on the use of outsourced cloud services can be found in the ‘Service continuity for
online services’ section of the Guidelines for networking.

Further information on the use of outsourced gateway services can be found in the ‘Gateways’ section of
the Guidelines for gateways.

Further information on managed service providers can be found in ASD’s How to manage your security
when engaging a managed service provider and Questions to ask managed service providers publications.

Further information on the definition of cloud computing can be found in National Institute of Standards
and Technology Special Publication 800-145, The NIST Definition of Cloud Computing.

Further information on securing cloud services can be found in the following ASD publications:

    Cloud computing security for cloud service providers

    Cloud computing security for executives

    Cloud computing security for tenants.

Further information on conducting security assessments of cloud service providers can be found in ASD’s
Cloud assessment and authorisation and Cloud assessment and authorisation FAQ publications.

Further information on shared responsibility models for cloud services can be found in ASD’s Cloud shared
responsibility model: Executive guidance publication.

Further information on the purpose of IRAP is available from ASD.

Further information on reporting cyber security incidents can be found in the ‘Reporting cyber security
incidents’ section of the Guidelines for cyber security incidents.




ISM | Guidelines for procurement and outsourcing                                                               8
Disclaimer
The material in this guide is of a general nature and should not be regarded as legal advice or relied on for assistance
in any particular circumstance or emergency situation. In any important matter, you should seek appropriate
independent professional advice in relation to your own circumstances.
The Commonwealth accepts no responsibility or liability for any damage, loss or expense incurred as a result of the
reliance on information contained in this guide.

Copyright
© Commonwealth of Australia 2025
With the exception of the Coat of Arms and where otherwise stated, all material presented in this publication is
provided under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
For the avoidance of doubt, this means this license only applies to material as set out in this document.



The details of the relevant license conditions are available on the Creative Commons website as is the full legal code
for the CC BY 4.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode.en).

Use of the Coat of Arms
The terms under which the Coat of Arms can be used are detailed on the Department of the Prime Minister and
Cabinet website (https://www.pmc.gov.au/resources/commonwealth-coat-arms-information-and-guidelines).
