Standard for AI transparency statements | digital.gov.au 
Skip to main content 

Menu 

Close 

Explore 

Close 

Explore 

Investment Oversight Framework (IOF) 

Close 

Investment Oversight Framework (IOF) 

State 1: Strategic Planning 

State 2: Prioritisation 

State 3: Contestability 

State 4: Assurance 

State 5: Sourcing 

State 6: Operations 

Digital Capability Assessment Process (DCAP) 

ICT Investment Approval Process 

Policy 

Close 

Policy 

Artificial intelligence 

- APS AI plan 2025 

- AI technical standard 

Cloud Policy 

Benefits Management Policy 

Digital Experience Policy 

- Digital Experience Toolkit 

Enabling government 

Close 

Enabling government 

Major Digital Projects Report 2026 

Buying and selling 

Digital architecture 

Policy toolkit: alpha 

Secretaries Digital and Data Committee 

SSA Review 

Featured initiatives 

Close 

Featured initiatives 

Data and Digital Government Strategy 

Trial of Microsoft 365 Copilot 

Get involved 

Observatory 

Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) 

Digital project research series 

About 

Contact 

Search 

Explore 

Investment Oversight Framework (IOF) 

State 1: Strategic Planning 

State 2: Prioritisation 

State 3: Contestability 

State 4: Assurance 

State 5: Sourcing 

State 6: Operations 

Digital Capability Assessment Process (DCAP) 

ICT Investment Approval Process 

Policy 

Artificial intelligence 

- APS AI plan 2025 

- AI technical standard 

Cloud Policy 

Benefits Management Policy 

Digital Experience Policy 

- Digital Experience Toolkit 

Enabling government 

Major Digital Projects Report 2026 

Buying and selling 

Digital architecture 

Policy toolkit: alpha 

Secretaries Digital and Data Committee 

SSA Review 

Featured initiatives 

Data and Digital Government Strategy 

Trial of Microsoft 365 Copilot 

Get involved 

Observatory 

Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) 

Digital project research series 

About 

Contact 

Search 

Policy for the responsible use of AI in government - Version 2.0 

Home 

Policy for the responsible use of AI in government - Version 2.0 

Standard for AI transparency statements 

Standard for AI transparency statements 

Standard for AI transparency statements 

Supporting the policy for responsible use of AI in government 

Use the following information to support your agency's implementation of the policy for responsible use of AI in government. 

Your responsibilities 

Under the policy, agencies must make a publicly available statement that outlines their approach to AI adoption, as directed by the Digital Transformation Agency (DTA). 

Agencies must follow this standard, which sets the direction for AI transparency statements including expectations and formatting. It establishes a consistent format and expectation for AI transparency statements in the Australian Government. Clear and consistent transparency statements build public trust and make it easier to understand and compare how government agencies adopt AI. 

At a minimum, agencies must provide the following information regarding their use of AI in their transparency statement: 

the intentions behind why the agency uses AI or is considering its adoption 

classification of AI use according to usage patterns and domains, as listed at Attachment A 

classification of use where the public may directly interact with, or be significantly impacted by, AI or its outputs without human review 

measures to monitor the effectiveness of deployed AI systems and protect the public against negative impacts 

overview of compliance with the requirements under the Policy for responsible use of AI in government 

compliance with applicable legislation and regulation 

when the statement was most recently updated. 

Statements must use clear, plain language 1 that avoids technical jargon and is consistent with the Australian Government Style Manual. They must also provide or direct to a contact email for further public enquiries. 

Agencies must publish transparency statements on their public facing website. It's recommended that a link to the statement is placed in a global menu, aligned to the approach often taken for privacy policies. 

Transparency statements must be reviewed and updated at these junctures: 

at least once a year 

when making a significant change to the agency's approach to AI 

when any new factor materially impacts the existing statement's accuracy. 

How to apply 

Implementing the AI transparency statements 

The policy provides a coordinated approach for the use of AI across the Australian Government. It builds public trust by supporting the Australian Public Service (APS) to engage with AI in a responsible way. 

Transparency is critical to public trust and is an important aim of the policy and broader APS Reform agenda 2 . The public should have confidence that agencies monitor the effectiveness of deployed AI systems and have measures to protect against negative impacts. 

AI transparency statements help agencies meet these aims by providing a foundational level of transparency on their use of AI. They publicly disclose: 

how AI is used and managed by the agency 

a commitment to safe and responsible use 

compliance with the policy. 

Agency transparency statements are intended to provide a high-level overview of agency AI use and management in line with the policy intent. 

Agencies are not required to list individual use cases or provide use case level detail. However, agencies may choose to provide detail beyond the requirements to publicly explain their approach to AI. 

Agencies must send the DTA a link to the statement when it is published or updated by emailing ai@dta.gov.au . 

Questions about implementation 

Accountable officials can contact the DTA with questions about implementing the transparency statements by emailing ai@dta.gov.au . 

Footnotes 

Australian Government Style Manual, Plain language and word choice ↩ 

APS Reform, Priority one: An APS that embodies integrity in everything it does. "The APS acts with integrity and fairness and is accountable and transparent in everything it does. This will build public trust and strengthen standards of integrity in our federal government." https://www.apsreform.gov.au/about-aps-reform/our-focus-areas ↩ 

Downloadable resource 

Download the Standard for AI transparency statements 

Standard for AI transparency statements 2.0.pdf (pdf, 245.03 KB) 
LAST UPDATED: 1 Dec 2025 

Artificial intelligence 

Australian public service AI plan 2025 

Foreword 

Introduction 

What we plan to achieve 

Trust: Transparency, ethics and governance 

People: Capability building and engagement 

Tools: Access, infrastructure and support 

Appendix A: Plan deliverables 

Statement of Intent on AI in the Australian Public Service 

AI Plan for the Australian Public Service 2025: At a glance 

Technical standard for government’s use of artificial intelligence 

Introduction, scope and audience 

AI system lifecycle 

Summary of requirements in the standard 

Interactive table of statements 

Whole of AI lifecycle statements 

Statement 1: Define an operational model 

Statement 2: Define the reference architecture 

Statement 3: Identify and build people capabilities 

Statement 4: Enable AI auditing 

Statement 5: Provide explainability based on the use case 

Statement 6: Manage system bias 

Statement 7: Apply version control practices 

Statement 8: Apply watermarking techniques 

Design statements 

Statement 9: Conduct pre-work 

Statement 10: Adopt a human-centred approach 

Statement 11: Design safety systemically 

Statement 12: Define success criteria 

Data statements 

Statement 13: Establish data supply chain management processes 

Statement 14: Implement data orchestration processes 

Statement 15: Implement data transformation and feature engineering practices 

Statement 16: Ensure data quality is acceptable 

Statement 17: Validate and select data Agencies must 

Statement 18: Enable data fusion, integration and sharing 

Statement 19: Establish the model and context dataset 

Train statements 

Statement 20: Plan the model architecture 

Statement 21: Establish training environment 

Statement 22: Implement model creation, tuning, and grounding 

Statement 23: Validate, assess, and update model 

Statement 24: Select trained models 

Statement 25: Implement continuous improvement frameworks 

Evaluate statements 

Statement 26: Adapt test strategies and practices for AI systems 

Statement 27: Test for specified behaviour 

Statement 28: Test for safety, robustness, and reliability 

Statement 29: Test for conformance and compliance 

Statement 30: Test for intended and unintended consequences 

Integrate statements 

Statement 31: Undertake integration planning 

Statement 32: Manage integration as a continuous practice 

Deploy statements 

Statement 33: Create business continuity plans 

Statement 34: Configure a staging environment 

Statement 35: Deploy to a production environment 

Statement 36: Implement rollout and safe rollback mechanisms 

Monitor statements 

Statement 37: Establish monitoring framework 

Statement 38: Undertake ongoing testing and monitoring 

Statement 39: Establish incident resolution processes 

Decommission statements 

Statement 40: Create a decommissioning plan 

Statement 41: Shut down the AI system 

Statement 42: Finalise documentation and reporting 

Use Case Assessment 

Key terms 

Trial of Microsoft 365 Copilot 

Summary report 

Executive summary 

Evaluation findings, methodology and approach 

Appendix 

Full report 

Executive summary and glossary 

Employee-related outcomes 

Productivity 

Whole-of-government adoption of generative AI 

Unintended outcomes 

Appendix A 

Appendix B 

Appendix C 

Appendix D 

Appendix E 

Survey questions 

Evaluation briefing 

AI in government policy 

Policy aim 

Implementation 

Strategy and oversight 

Preparedness and operations 

AI use case impact assessment 

Appendices 

Accountability 

Transparency statements 

Staff training 

Agency guidance on public generative AI 

Staff guidance on public generative AI 

Resources 

AI impact assessment tool 

Introduction 

Guidance for the tool 

1. Basic information 

2. Purpose and expected benefits 

3. Inherent risk assessment 

4. Threshold assessment outcome 

5. Fairness 

6. Reliability and safety 

7. Privacy protection and security 

8. Transparency and explainability 

9. Contestability 

10. Human-centred values 

11. Accountability 

12. Use case review and next steps 

Appendix - Risk rating guidance 

Pilot AI assurance framework 

Introduction 

1. Basic information 

2. Purpose and expected benefits 

3. Threshold assessment 

4. Fairness 

5. Reliability and safety 

6. Privacy protection and security 

7. Transparency and explainability 

8. Contestability 

9. Accountability 

10. Human-centred values 

11. Internal review and next steps 

Pilot AI assurance framework guidance 

Guidance 1. Basic information 

Guidance 2. Purpose and expected benefits 

Guidance 3. Threshold assessment 

Guidance 4. Fairness 

Guidance 5. Reliability and safety 

Guidance 6. Privacy protection and security 

Guidance 7. Transparency and explainability 

Guidance 8. Contestability 

Guidance 9. Accountability 

Guidance 10. Human-centred values 

Guidance 11. Internal review and next steps 

Attachment 

Pilot implementation report: Australian Government artificial intelligence (AI) assurance framework 

Findings and recommendations 

Recommendations 

Context, data and rationale 

Appendix A: Pilot agencies 

Appendix B: Post-assessment survey questions 

Related frameworks 

Use classification 

Insights 

Connect with the digital community 

Share, build or learn digital experience and skills with training and events, and collaborate with peers across government. 

Join the Digital Profession 

An initiative of the Digital Transformation Agency 

© Commonwealth of Australia. With the exception of the Commonwealth Coat of Arms and where otherwise noted, this work is licensed under the CC BY 4.0 license. 

Privacy l Disclaimer and copyright l Accessibility 

Return focus to the top of the page
